---
layout: posts
title: Programmazione concorrente, parallela e su cloud
category: teaching
---

#### Master Degree Course of prof. Vittorio Scarano
##### Università degli Studi di Salerno
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Homeworks List

| Name |  Description | Details | 
|---|---|---|
| _gameoflife_ | Conway's Game of Life Game |[link](gol)|
| _jacobi_ |  Simple Jacobi iteration |[link](jacobi)|
| _matrixmultiplication_  |  Parallel matrix multiplication |[link](matrix)|
| _nbody_|  n-body problem |[link](nbody)|
| _pi_ |  Compute in parallel an approximation of PI |[link](pi)|
| _wordscount_ | Compute the frequency of words in a set of files |[link](wordscount)|


-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Develop different soluzions to the problem exploiting:
- only point-to-point MPI communication routines.
- only collective MPI communication routines.
- point-to-point and collective MPI communication routines.

## Execute benchmark on different EC2 instances types, for instance:
- m4.large 
- m4.xlarge

[AWS Educate Instances](https://s3.amazonaws.com/awseducate-starter-account-services/AWS_Educate_Starter_Accounts_and_AWS_Services.pdf)

## How benchmark your applications on a cloud computing infrastructure? 

### Others Tools to benchmark on Amazon AWS 

- StraCluster* toolkit use this [script](https://github.com/spagnuolocarmine/amazonhpc) to setup an Amazon EC2 cluster supporting OpenMPI.
-  [Java application](https://github.com/spagnuolocarmine/aws-cluster-toolkit)  to setup an Amazon EC2 cluster supporting OpenMPI based on StarCLuster AMI.
*it does not woek using Amazon AWS Educate [last check May 2018]

### Start EC2 instances and configure manually an MPI cluster

This method is based on the public StarCluster AMI ami-52a0c53b (Linux Ubuntu) available on us-east-1 AWS region. For other information visit the [StarCLuster site page](http://star.mit.edu/cluster/).

#### How to manually configure a MPI cluster of two istances?
In this example is described how to execute and manually configure a cluster of two t2.micro instances using the AWS WebConsole.

1) Create a new key-pair and store it on your local machine, suppose that the name of the key is _kcluster_.
2) Start two new t2.micro instances using the StarCluster AMI (ami-52a0c53b) and select the _kcluster_ key-pair, additionally rename it as master and slave0. Set a new rule to the default security group that allows to open all TCP ports (0-65535) from anywhere (you can do it in the Configure Security Group tab).
3) Connect via SSH and execute these commands on the master instance to create a new user pcpc and generate a SSH key:
```
sudo useradd -s /bin/bash -m -d /home/pcpc -g root pcpc
sudo mkdir -p /home/pcpc/.ssh
sudo chown pcpc:root ../pcpc/.ssh
sudo passwd pcpc
sudo login pcpc
ssh-keygen -t rsa
```
4) Set the SSH key for the user pcpc.
```
cat .ssh/id_rsa.pub >> .ssh/authorized_keys
ssh localhost
```
4) Connect using SSH and execute these commands on a slave instance:
```
sudo useradd -s /bin/bash -m -d /home/pcpc -g root pcpc
sudo mkdir -p /home/pcpc/.ssh
sudo chown pcpc:root ../pcpc/.ssh
sudo passwd pcpc
sudo login pcpc
```
5) Copy from your local machine the _kcluster_ file (pem file) on the master node.
``` 
scp -i pcpkey.pem pcpkey.pem ubuntu@ec2-34-207-88-239.compute-1.amazonaws.com:
```
6) From the master node copy on each slave the files id_rsa and id_rsa.pub:
```
sudo scp -i pcpkey.pem ../pcpc/.ssh/id_rsa ubuntu@ip_slave_internal:
sudo scp -i pcpkey.pem ../pcpc/.ssh/id_rsa.pub ubuntu@ip_slave_internal:
```
7) Connect on the slave and set the owner as the pcpc user for the files id_rsa and id_rsa.pub.
```
sudo chown pcpc:root id_rsa id_rsa.pub 
```
8) Connect on the slave and move the files id_rsa and id_rsa.pub on /home/pcpc/.ssh.
```
sudo mv id_rsa id_rsa.pub /home/pcpc/.ssh
```
9) Login on the slave as pcpc user and set the SSH key.
```
cat .ssh/id_rsa.pub >> .ssh/authorized_keys
ssh localhost
```

##### HINT

In order to add a new slave you have to start new EC2 instance and repeat the steps 4 and from 6 to 9.

------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
## Test MPI Program

Follow these steps in order to create and test a Hello World MPI program. Consider that you are logged as pcpc user on the master node.

- Create a new MPI program

```vim hello.c```

- HelloWorld MPI program

```
#include <mpi.h>
#include <stdio.h>

int main(int argc, char** argv) {
    // Initialize the MPI environment
    MPI_Init(NULL, NULL);

    // Get the number of processes
    int world_size;
    MPI_Comm_size(MPI_COMM_WORLD, &world_size);

    // Get the rank of the process
    int world_rank;
    MPI_Comm_rank(MPI_COMM_WORLD, &world_rank);

    // Get the name of the processor
    char processor_name[MPI_MAX_PROCESSOR_NAME];
    int name_len;
    MPI_Get_processor_name(processor_name, &name_len);

    // Print off a hello world message
    printf("Hello world from processor %s, rank %d"
           " out of %d processors\n",
           processor_name, world_rank, world_size);

    // Finalize the MPI environment.
    MPI_Finalize();
}
```
- Compile the MPI program 
```mpicc hello.c -o hello```
- Copy on all cluster machine the compiled program
```scp hello IP_SLAVE:```
- Run the program on the cluster
```mpirun -np 4 --host MASTER,IP_SLAVE1,IP_SLAVE2 hello```

------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
### Submit a solution

Each solution should be compliant with the problem project template. You can submit a solution via mail using the [PCPC-SOLUTION-NAME-SURNAME]  object to vitsca@dia.unisa.it and cspagnuolo@unisa.it. The submitted file should be a compressed directory using tape archive.

##### Prepare your submition

Each solution folder must contain the C sources and a report Readme file (in Markdown format) describing all benchmarks (expressed in terms of strong and weak scalability) of the application. Solutions without the Readme file or that cannot easily compile using mpicc will be not considered.

In your home project directory archives your project:
```
tar -cvf solution.tar.gz *
```
Extract your project:
```
tar -xvf solution.tar.gz
```
## Benchmark your solutions:

Present the results of  benchmarks varying the number of EC2 instances involved in the computation. The results should be presented in terms of [strong and weak scalability](https://www.sharcnet.ca/help/index.php/Measuring_Parallel_Scaling_Performance).

## Homework Evaluation Criteria

Homeworks are evaluated on a range of 30 total points. The final score is diveded in four level:

- **A** [30-28]
- **B** [27-25]
- **C** [24-22]
- **D** [21-18]

#### Points

- **Correctness**. 0 to 10 points. Measures the student's commitment to develop a solution that is compliant with the problem requirement (obviously!). But also solution that solve part of the problem can be evaluated, if it is clear that only minor part of the problem are not correctly solved.
- **Style**. 0 to 10 points. Measures the student's commitment to develop a solution styling it and exploiting all features of MPI and C language, paying attention to use arguments of the parallel and concurrent computing fundamental part.
- **Problem evaluation and Benchamrks**. 0 to 10 points. Measures the student's commitment to undestand the problem and give a good solution, moreover, mesures the student's commitment to presents benchamrks.
- **Lateness**. The total score is decreased by 5% each day, until a 40% eight days or more late. The homework _must_ be subitted for review 8 days before the exam date.
